The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to anarchism, generally defined as the political philosophy which holds the state to be undesirable, unnecessary and harmful,[1][2] or alternatively as opposing authority and hierarchical organization in the conduct of human relations.
Proponents of anarchism, known as anarchists, advocate stateless societies or non-hierarchical voluntary associations.
Formal anarchist organizational initiatives date back to the mid-19th century. The oldest surviving anarchist organizations include Freedom Press (est. 1886) of England, the Industrial Workers of the World (est. 1905), Anarchist Black Cross (est. 1906), Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden (est. 1910) and the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (est. 1910) of Spain.
Anarchism has many heterogeneous and diverse schools of thought, united by a common opposition to compulsory rule.
Anarchist schools are characterized by "the belief that government is both harmful and unnecessary", but may differ fundamentally, supporting anything from extreme individualism to complete collectivism.
[13] Regardless, some are viewed as being compatible, and it is not uncommon for individuals to subscribe to more than one. Some of the following terms do not refer to specific branches of anarchist thought, but rather are generic labels applied to various branches, they are marked as umbrella terms.
Historic precedents and background events (pre-1840)
1793 – William Godwin publishes Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, implicitly establishing the philosophical foundations of anarchism.[87]
1827 – Josiah Warren opens the Cincinnati Time Store, an early experiment in mutualist economics.
Classical development and global expansion (1840–1917)
1840 – Pierre-Joseph Proudhon publishes What Is Property? and becomes history's first self-proclaimed anarchist.
1864 – the International Workingmen's Association (IWA) is founded. Early seeds of split between anarchists and Marxists begin.
1871 – the Paris Commune takes place. Early anarchists (mutualists) participate.
1872 – the IWA meets at the Hague Congress. Anarchists expelled by Marxist branch, beginning the anarchist/Marxist conflict.
1878 – Max Hödel fails in assassination attempt against Kaiser Wilhelm I. Ushers in era of propaganda of the deed.
1882 – God and the State by Mikhail Bakunin is published.
1886 – the Haymarket affair takes place, origin of May Day as a worker's holiday and inspires a new generation of anarchists.
1892 – The Conquest of Bread by Peter Kropotkin published and establishes anarcho-communism.